Hans Berger (1929) developed the **electroencephalograph (EEG)**, a device still used today that measures electrical activity generated by the brain. This allows scientists to look at the patterns generated by the EEG to infer whether a person is awake or asleep, dreaming or not, and to tell which regions of the brain are active during specific tasks.

EEGs can detect rapid changes in electrical activity in the range of milliseconds. 

This method is noninvasive and only requires electrodes to be placed on the patients' scalp.

**Disadvantages:**
- only show averaged neural activity that reaches the surface of the scalp, so shallow information (no details about what's happening inside neurons)
- not very precise in terms of location of activity - better for "when" than "where"

## Neuroimaging

Different than EEGs, these techniques allow scientists to see inside the brain's structure, its function, and sometimes both.

### Structural imaging

#### Computed Tomography (CT) Scans
A 3D reconstruction of multiple x-rays. It displays far more detail than a single X-ray.

#### Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
Measures the release of energy from water in biological tissues after exposure to a magnectic field. They're better than CTs for detecting soft tissue, like brain tumors.

### Functional imaging
#### Position Emission Tomography (PET)
Measures changes in the brain's activity in response to stimuli. This method is invasive and has been superseded by [[#Functional MRI (fMRI)]].

It relies on the fact that cells increase their intake of glucose when they're active. In this method, patients receive an injection of a radioactive glucose-like molecule, which later allows the scanner to measure where these molecules are gathering, showing brain activity.

#### Functional MRI (fMRI)
Measures the change in blood oxygen level, which is an indirect indicator of neural activity. That's because brain cells increase their oxygen intake when they're busy.

Often used to visualize brain activity in response to specific tasks, such as looking at emotional faces or solving math problems. 

**Advantages**
- ability to provide detailed images of activity in small brain regions and over brief time intervals

**Disadvantages**
- extremely sensitive to motion

#### Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS)
Used to either enhance or interrupt brain function in a specific region. Works by applying a strong and quickly changing magnetic field to the skull, creating electric fields in the brain.

Offers useful insights regarding which brain areas are involved in different psychological processes. For example, if TMS interrupts the temporal lobe and the subject displays temporary language impairment, we can tentatively conclude this lobe plays a role in language processing.

**Advantages**
- non-invasive direct manipulation of specific brain regions, which allows inferring **causation**
- may provide relief for depression (especially repetitive TMS, or rTMS) and auditory hallucinations

#### Magnetoencephalography (MEG)
Detects electrical activity in the brain by measuring tiny magnetic fields. As such, it reveals patterns of magnetic fields on the surface of the skull, displaying which brain areas become active in response to stimuli.

**Advantages**
- ability to track changes over milliseconds
